---
title: "Review: Realforce 104UG Hi-Pro"
tags: hardware, realforce, unicomp
---

#+STARTUP: indent showall
#+OPTIONS: ^:nil

This is a review of the 東プレ (Topre) Realforce 104UG Hi-Pro computer
keyboard, model YK2100, originally released in April 2013 (hereinafter
"104UG"); this keyboard features the famous (and expensive!) Topre
switches. I purchased the 104UG for $290 (before tax/shipping) from
[[http://elitekeyboards.com/][EliteKeyboards]]. The 104UG is my second
mechanical keyboard after the Unicomp Ultra Classic, model UB40P4A,
which I purchased back in fall 2009 for $70 before tax/shipping
(hereinafter "Unicomp"). Because my mechanical keyboard expertise is
limited to these two keyboards, I will be comparing the 104UG with the
Unicomp.

I am a programmer and touch typist, and also have an acute sense of
hearing. While I love the Unicomp's tactile feel, I feel that the keys
sound too loud (except when I have my heaphones on). The sound issue was
the main motivating factor behind my decision to purchase another
keyboard.

I did not choose a small form-factor (SFF) keyboard like the
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Happy_Hacking_Keyboard][HHKB]], for
several reasons. First, I use Linux so keys like =Page Down=, =Page Up=,
=Insert=, =Home=, =End=, =Scroll Lock= are very useful to me; this is
the major reason why I did not purchase a smaller form-factor keyboard
with fewer keys, as I do not enjoy pressing the =Fn= key to use these
aforementioned keys. In Linux, I use =Shift+Insert= every day because
it's the de-facto way to paste text; it would be painful to hunt down
the =Fn= key every time I wanted to paste something. Second, I still
want to use my Unicomp for extended typing sessions on my laptop (I hate
my laptop's built-in keyboard), and I don't want to change keyboard
layouts every time I switch from my desktop (104UG) and primary laptop
(Unicomp). I want to save every ounce of muscle memory when moving
between my systems; hence my decision to buy a standard US ASCII 104-key
keyboard like the Unicomp.

* Build Quality
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: build-quality
   :END:

The overall build quality of the 104UG is excellent. There is zero
twisting when you try to twist the two ends of the keyboard, and the
keyboard itself is pretty heavy. It is actually /heavier/ than the
Unicomp, which is known for its "built-like-a-tank" reputation. Also,
the USB cable on the 104UG is slightly /thicker/ than the Unicomp.

The Unicomp, actually, comes with lots of plastic blemishes, although
they are not that noticeable. Also, the Unicomp's keycaps all have a
tearing dot area that looks quite ugly --- you can see them all if you
look at the keys by leaning over their backs (the angle that a person
sitting directly across from you would have). If you've ever built model
kits of assemble-yourself, miniature plastic airplanes or tanks, which
come in sheets of plastic pop-out parts, you'd know exactly what I'm
talking about, because they look quite similar to that effect, although,
to Unicomp's credit, the dots have been smoothed out. (If you clean your
Unicomp's keycaps with cloth, the dots will sometimes catch a thread or
two, because they are sometimes sharp.) No such dots exist on the 104UG.

* DIP Switches
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: dip-switches
   :END:

The 104UG does not have any DIP switches like on the HHKB, but I find
such hardwired technology useless in today's modern computing world. I
use Linux where you can use
[[https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Xmodmap][xmodmap]] which allows
you to switch /any/ key with /any other/ key, or even disable keys
entirely.[fn:1] You just can't get this kind of ultimate flexibility
with DIP switches.

The only advantages for using DIP switches I can think of is if you (1)
like to move your keyboard around different computers not owned by
yourself and (2) you are not technically knowledgeable enough to
download key-switching software to get the same behavior. Or, maybe you
only connect to computers using a low-level interface (e.g., Linux tty
without X) and want to use your modified keys there before something
like =xmodmap= can be used... although I find this scenario unrealistic.

* Feel
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: feel
   :END:

The 104UG's high profile keycaps gets some getting used to. The
spherical keys do not really make my typing experience any more
difficult, but I do like how the number keys on the top row really stand
out, making it much easier to type those keys than a traditional
keyboard. Also, the keycap surfaces have a very slight rubbery feel,
which you can feel when you touch the wider keys like =Enter= or
=Shift=. I believe that this is because the keycap surfaces are so
smooth, and not because they are made out of PBT (polybutylene
terephthalate), because the spacebar (which is made of acrylonitrile
butadiene styrene, or ABS) feels virtually identical when you
intentionally rub against the keycap surfaces with your fingers. The
Unicomp's keycaps are made from PBT, as well, I believe, and there the
keycaps have microscopic bumps on the vertical surface where the keys
are printed, so that they feel like normal plastic. (The Unicomp's
keycaps, from the sides, are smooth but also /glossy/; the 104UG's
keycap surfaces are all uniformly smooth, but not glossy at all).

The overall typing experience on the 104UG is a pleasure to use.
However, I do want to eventually try out a 55g version because, coming
from buckling spring technology, these 45g weighted keys feel very
light. I can feel a slight rubbery bump when I press a key on the 104UG,
but I am so used to the accurate, hard clicks of buckling springs that I
just feel a little bit unimpressed by the tactile feedback.

I will also state here that on the Unicomp, I could rest /all/ of my
muscles on my arms, from my fingers, to the wrists, the forearms, all
the way up the shoulder, when I rested my fingers in the default
position (fingers on =A=, =S=, =D=, =F=, and =J=, =K=, =L=, =;=). I
cannot do the same on the 104UG, because my middle fingers usually end
up pressing the keys (=D= or =K=); I have to always be conscious about
resting my muscles. This is proving to be somewhat distracting as my
Linux setup requires almost no use of the mouse, and I have a habit of
just resting my hands on my keyboard.[fn:2] For this reason, I am very
tempted to try out Topre's 55g weighted keys, and if that key weighting
will allow me to rest my fingers/arms just like my Unicomp.

** Keycap Wiggle
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: keycap-wiggle
    :END:

The keycaps feel wiggly because of their extra tall height; you can
readily feel this when you wiggle your finger on the top of the keycap
without pressing down on it. The wiggle is nearly absent for the
"regular" height keys on the bottom row --- the =CTRL=, Windows key,
=ALT=, spacebar, etc.; I wonder if the non-high-profile Realforce
keyboards feel this way as well (and I am tempted to buy another
Realforce just to see). To give you some perspective the Unicomp keys
hardly wiggle at all (except for the spacebar), and I actually prefer
the feel and sound of the Unicomp keys as my fingers run across them.
When you do brush your fingers across the keys on the 104UG, you hear a
flurry of very thin springs touching against plastic and honestly it
does a disservice because this sound makes the keyboard appear like it's
been used for 5 years.

* Volume
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: volume
   :END:

The 104UG is less loud than the Unicomp when I press the keys, so that
is a plus. I can also silently press the keys if I am careful enough ---
great if you need to type something at night but don't want to wake your
neighbors. On the Unicomp, you cannot register a keypress without an
audible click of the metal spring underneath each key; even if you press
a key ever so slowly, you will still get a clicking sound.

* Rubber Feet
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: rubber-feet
   :END:

I don't really care for the rubber feet on this keyboard, or any other
keyboard, and can't really understand why a lot of people care so much
about them. I am a touch typist (no ironic three-finger typing like you
usually see on most keyboard-aficionado videos) and there is /no way/
that I'm going to somehow slide the keyboard around as I type, rubber
feet or not, on any keyboard. Actually, I would prefer it if the 104UG
did not have rubber feet at all, because then I could just slide it
around easily instead of picking it up each time and setting it down,
seeing as how it is. (And, because it's so heavy, there is that much
less worry about it sliding around without any rubber feet).

I have no qualms about the bottom of the keyboard becoming scratched or
whatnot, because that area of the keyboard feels as aesthetically
important as the underside of my car. In fact, if I do somehow manage to
remove the rubber feet, neither the cable nor the official Realforce
product label would become scratched because the former is already set
well inside the cord inlay, and the latter rests on the part of the
keyboard that already enjoys about 0.5cm of clearance from the desk (the
104UG, like other Realforce models, has a concave underside design).

The Unicomp also has rubber feet, but they are less rubbery and not as
thick, and I like that. The Unicomp's underbody does not have a concave
design like the 104UG, and the official Unicomp sticker on the back has
obvious wear-and-tear damage on it as I've used it for the past 3.5
years. But again, I don't really care about this kind of damage,
because, well, I care about the keyboard's performance, not its sticker.

* Plastic Swivel Feet
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: plastic-swivel-feet
   :END:

The 104UG, like the Unicomp, comes with two swivel feet that you can
pull out to make the keyboard become more elevated at an angle. I never
use these feet on the Unicomp, and I don't intend to use them on the
104UG. I believe my experience on the piano has somewhat affected my
fingers' resting position on the keys, and I prefer to have the keys
lays flatter than at an elevated angle.

* ABS Plastic Spacebar
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: abs-plastic-spacebar
   :END:

The 104UG has polybutylene terephthalate (PBT) plastic keycaps, except
for the spacebar which is made out of acrylonitrile butadiene styrene
(ABS). I've always wondered whether the spacebar would feel
significantly different agains the other keys, but I can't feel any
difference.

* Quirks
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: quirks
   :END:

Interestingly, the 104UG has some peculiar features.

- The =F= and =J= keys do /not/ have a special bump on the key like 99%
  of all keyboards out in the market.[fn:3] As I'm a touch typist, I
  depend on these bumps to figure out where my fingers should reset back
  to without looking at the keyboard. Still, I am surprised that after
  some use, the lack of these bumps has not really resulted in any
  significant inconveniences.
- The USB cable that runs out of the keyboard /must/ be placed within
  the cord inlay area that forces the cable to exit to the left or right
  edge of the keyboard. There is /no/ hole at the center of the keyboard
  to let the cord exit from the middle. If you do not place the cord
  within the guided inlay at all, the keyboard will end up resting
  entirely on the cord itself, making it unsuitable for placement on a
  flat surface.

* Cost and Value
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: cost-and-value
   :END:

The 104UG costs about 4x as much as the Unicomp. As much as I appreciate
high-grade Japanese engineering and design, I think the 104UG's real
value should be closer to $200, not $290. Still, I understand that
manufacturing costs are simply more expensive in Japan, and that's
probably where a third or so of the premium comes from.

* Conclusion
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: conclusion
   :END:

I really like the 104UG a lot. I was surprised by its industrial-grade
build quality, which felt even more tougher/heavier than the Unicomp
(keyboard weight, USB cord thickness), combined with the fine design
aesthetics of it. However, it is certainly not my ideal keyboard; I
could do away with the [[#quirks][Quirks]] I mentioned above. The price
is expensive, although I think it is reasonably justified given that it
is entirely made in Japan, and comes from overseas.

My ideal Realforce would have everything the 104UG already has, minus
the quirks, and the following:

- (Probably) uniform 55g weights
- Little or no keycap wiggle, equivalent at least to the Unicomp
- No rubber feet
- No swivel feet

** 104UG vs. Unicomp
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: ug-vs.-unicomp
    :END:

I absolutely love the tactile feel of buckling springs --- it is
extremely satisfying and also /extremely accurate/, even more so than
Topre switches. The Unicomp has made me much more aware of my typos;
sometimes I don't even have to look at the screen to realize that I've
made a typo (like when I'm copying something down from a book and my
eyes are on the page, not the screen). It's just that the loud click
behind buckling spring technology makes it difficult for me to enjoy
using it when I have classical music playing in the background (I enjoy
soft piano sonatas, no less). However, I will say for the record here
that buckling spring keys on the Unicomp do not uniformly create the
same tactile feel or sound when they are pressed, probably because of
the somewhat lax quality controls behind Unicomp's manufacturing
practices. To this day, my Unicomp's =K= key makes a much louder sound
and tactile feedback than the adjacent =J= key, which was annoying to me
when I first got the keyboard.

The Unicomp also feels like the spiritual equivalent of an AK-47 --- the
buckling spring switches, by their nature, are so tough that I have no
fear of disturbing anything when I work with it. For example, I will
gladly carry my Unicomp inside my backback without any protective
materials around it. On the other hand, I will probably never just throw
my 104UG inside my backpack without any protective layer... it just
feels so wrong. Maybe it's because the wiggly keys make them feel so
delicate to me.

I will also state for the record here that my Unicomp's keypresses feel
/exactly the same/ as the day I got the keyboard in the mail, over 3
years ago. Mind you, I used it through school and many of my programming
projects; /and/ I use Vim-styled navigation keys (=H=, =J=, =K=, =L=)
daily, so these home row keys have been pressed far more than the other
keys --- and yet, these keys do not show the slightest hint of being
worn out; scratch that, the keypresses on the Unicomp /still feel brand
new/. Buckling springs are that much awesome. Topre switches do use
rubber membranes inside, although it is difficult to say just how long
it will take before the rubber gives out and the keys stop feeling new.

For these reasons, I cannot unequivocally say that I prefer the 104UG
over the Unicomp, or that I prefer Topre switches above buckling spring
switches. I will actually give a slight edge to the Unicomp because I
just like the sheer ruggedness of the key switches --- the most
important part of any keyboard.

[fn:1] Surely there are similar programs on Windows or Mac systems as
       well.

[fn:2] Even when I switch between desktop workspaces or different
       program windows, I use my keyboard, thanks to
       [[http://xmonad.org/][XMonad]].

[fn:3] Topre should change the box art on the shipping box that the
       104UG comes in, because there these keys do have a small plastic
       bump depicted on them. Misleading, no?
