---
title: "The Parking Lot Problem: A Successor to FizzBuzz?"
tags: programming, ruby, haskell
mathjax: on
---

#+STARTUP: indent showall
#+OPTIONS: ^:nil

In one of my side projects, I encountered a pair of interesting
problems, the first of which which I call the /Parking Lot/ problem, and
the sister problem the /Parking Load/ problem. They are but toy
problems, but to anyone outside of the programming field, they sound
quite complicated!

I've provided "Expected Output" sections for you to try out your own
solutions against, so don't be too aggressive with the scrollbar if you
want to quiz yourself!

* Problem Statement
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: problem-statement
   :END:

Imagine an infinite parking lot, where each parking space is given a
natural number, starting with 0, 1, 2, 3, ... to infinity. The entire
lot is a single row of spaces --- so that space =0= is the one closest
to the entrance. There are a finite number of cars randomly parked in
the lot, as people come and go as they wish. A new car has just arrived
outside the lot, and the driver asks you, "/Where is the closest open
parking space?/"

The only information you have is the /taken/ spaces list (=T=), which
lists all the occupied parking spaces. This list is sometimes sorted ---
sometimes, it is not!

* Expected Output
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: expected-output
   :END:

Here is a set of expected inputs and outputs for our problem:

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  Input -> Output
  [] -> 0
  [0] -> 1
  [0, 1] -> 2
  [1] -> 0
  [1,2,3] -> 0
  [0,1,2,3] -> 4
  [0,1,2,3,1000] -> 4
#+END_EXAMPLE

. You may notice that the input list is sorted (for readability), but
recall that =T= /may or may not/ be sorted! Try your own solution
against these expected outputs!

* Some Preliminary Observations
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: some-preliminary-observations
   :END:

The most important thing here is =T=. If =T= is empty, then our parking
lot is empty, so the answer is obviously =0=. In all other cases, we
have to figure out the lowest number that is /absent/ from =T=.
Essentially, we can reduce the problem as follows:

- Find the lowest number not present in the set of integers =T=, where
  the lowest possible number is =0=.

I used the metaphor of the parking spaces because it is more memorable,
and more importantly, more familiar to the general public.

* Mathematical Approach
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: mathematical-approach
   :END:

Conceptually, the problem is very simple. Consider the infinite set =N=,
which includes all natural numbers, starting from =0=. Then obviously,
we can start with =N= itself, and remove every number in =N= that is
also present in =T=. Then, when we are done (=T= is empty), we can look
at =N= and retrieve the lowest number.

** Sorting
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: sorting
    :END:

Intuitively, we are really only interested in the first consecutive
group of cars parked next to each other. Essentially, what you do is
walk along from the very first parking space, =0=, and see if it is
occupied. If it is occupied, you move on to the next space --- if it is
not occupied, you can stop because you found your answer!

There is no way to solve the problem without first sorting =T=.[fn:1]
You can solve the problem without sorting only in the edge case where
=T='s lowest number is greater than =0= --- i.e., if the car most
closely parked to the entrance is not on =0=, then you do not need to
bother sorting =T=, because the answer is simply =0=. And, finding the
lowest number in a given set is always a $O(n)$ operation because you
need to loop through the entire set just once, keeping track of the
lowest number found.

In the more common case (as seen in real life), the parking space
closest to the driver (the most desirable parking space) is already
taken; and what's more, the group of spaces closest to the driver is
already taken. In this case, we have to proceed from space =0=, and
incrementally observe every subsequent space, until we arrive at an
empty parking space. The insight here is that we are treating the
multitude of consecutively parked cars as one giant car parked across
multiple spaces, and are just trying to find the total number of spaces
this car occupies.

* Ruby
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: ruby
   :END:

I think it is time for some actual code. While I could explain how the
Ruby version works, I feel that I have already expounded upon the
problem enough above, so that the code here should make intuitive sense.

- i toy/parking-space.rb

* Haskell
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: haskell
   :END:

The Haskell version is a direct translation of the Ruby version, as an
iterative approach works just fine. The only drawback is that we use
=Int= instead of the arbitrarily large =Integer= type for succinctness
(we can use =Integer=, but some built-in functions like =sort= only work
on =Int=).

- i toy/parking-space.hs

** Functional solution
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: functional-solution
    :END:

Michele Alzetta kindly sent me another solution, which has a much
stronger "Haskell" flavor. I've made some slight adjustments; here it
is:

- i toy/parking-space2.hs

. The advantage of this version is that it only evaluates =length ts=
(the input list) as a last resort, thanks to =fromMaybe=. It also uses
standard Prelude functions like =elemIndex= and =zipWith= for easier
understanding. Thanks Michele!

* Low-Level Interlude
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: low-level-interlude
   :END:

Did you realize that the basic concept here is the same as finding the
least significant bit (LSB)? I.e., if the parking lot is one giant
computer word, and a =1= bit represents an available parking space, then
we are simply trying to find the LSB (the index of the bit being the
same thing as the parking space number). This is such a common scenario,
that there are native hardware instructions for this on most all CPUs.
The canonical name for this operation is
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Find_first_set][/find first set/]] or
/find first one/.[fn:2] In Linux, you can do =man ffs= to learn about
how to use it in your C program.

Of course, the parking lot in our problem is of infinite size, which
makes the size of =T= arbitrarily large; alas, we cannot use =ffs= here.

* The Parking Load Problem
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: the-parking-load-problem
  :END:

An interesting related problem is what I call the /Parking Load/
problem. The scenario is the same as in the /Parking Lot/ problem, but
with the following twist: if the last (most far away) parked car
determines the bounds of the parking lot (i.e., it is no longer
considered infinitely large), then how many parking spaces are
available?

Interestingly, this problem is easier to solve than the first problem.
This seems paradoxical --- surely, finding the first available parking
space is easier than counting every single available space! But it is
true --- this problem is indeed easier --- because we can solve the
problem /without sorting/.

If we talk in terms of our "Low-Level Interlude," this is essentially
the same as saying, "Count the number of =1= bits." There are very
clever ways of counting bits, but that is not our concern, and so I will
present a naive solution in Ruby.

** Expected Output
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: expected-output-1
   :END:

Like in the previous problem, below are some expected outputs for you to
test your own version against.

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  Input -> Output
  [] -> "N/A"
  [0] -> 0
  [0,1] -> 0
  [0,1,3] -> 1
  [999] -> 999
  [1,5,999] -> 997
#+END_EXAMPLE

We return "N/A" for the empty case because this condition does not make
sense under the terms of the problem, which defines the bounds of the
parking lot based on the car farthest away; if there are no cars to
begin with, the problem cannot be posed.

** Ruby
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: ruby-1
   :END:

Without further ado, here is the Ruby solution.

- i toy/parking-spaces.rb

** Haskell
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: haskell-1
   :END:

The Haskell version is not much different.

- i toy/parking-spaces.hs

** A Successor to FizzBuzz?
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: a-successor-to-fizzbuzz
   :END:

For some reason, I get a strong feeling that these problems are much
more interesting than
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fizz_buzz][FizzBuzz]]. The fact that we
talk about an /infinitely large/ parking lot will probably throw a lot
of newbies and naive thinkers off the right track. You have to be
especially careful about edge cases, such as the empty list in the
second Haskell version. I believe that good coders have a keen sense of
edge cases, because correct algorithms must withstand them without
blowing up. Just review the Haskell solutions and notice all of the edge
cases that we have to look out for!

You might even get some crazy answers that consider at length related
nonessential tangents and Big-O notation, but fail to realize just how
simple, at least conceptually, the problem becomes once you sort =T=.
And, I like these problems more than FizzBuzz because there are so many
interesting points about it. For example, you can ask a simple related
question: if you were the keeper of this parking lot, what kind of data
structure would you use to keep track of the taken parking spaces? And
of course, there are very conspicuous low-level analogues that more
experienced coders can relate to.

I hope you enjoyed reading about these problems. Maybe you can quiz your
friend about it, and see how they respond!

Happy hacking!

** Update: January 2015
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: update-january-2015
   :END:

I applied for a job at [[http://periscope.io][Periscope]], and during
the process Tom O'Neill pointed out that the Parking Lot Problem can be
solved without sorting using sparse bitsets.[fn:3] The idea is pretty
simple --- each bit represents a parking space, and if it is set to 1,
we treat it as occupied, and if it is 0, we treat it as empty. If there
are 1,000,000 parking spaces, then we would need 1,000,000 bits. But
this is where "sparseness" comes in; if there are a ton of 0's --- say,
50,000 of them --- in one spot, we can easily encode that information in
fewer bits; the traditional approach is to use run-length encoding (RLE)
to do this. E.g., you could write the number "50,000", and then enclose
it in special OP-codes that you reserve to declare that the "50,000"
here means something special (in our case, that these 50,000 bits are
all zeroes).

Another approach is to use an octree (a tree that always has 8 child
nodes), or "Bzets" as coined by the late
[[http://www.cs.ucla.edu/news/news-archive/2012/2012][Robert Uzgalis]],
who passed away in 2012. An excellent set of slides are available online
if you Google them, but I've also uploaded them to my site
[[../file/bzet.pdf][here]].
Essentially, the idea is to have a tree with 3 possible values for the
child nodes: =0 1 T=. A =0= means that you can stop recursing down the
tree, as all child nodes, recursively are all set to =0=. A =1=,
similarly, means you can stop because all child nodes are set to =1=. A
=T= just means that you have to walk down to the child nodes, because if
you gather up all the child nodes' bits, they are mixed with =0= s and
=1= s. You can imagine how compact some representations can become. In
fact, Uzgalis calls bzets as having logarithmic compression! A
[[https://github.com/Bovinedragon/Binary-Bzet][project on Github
exists]] that seems to be from one of the 3 UCLA student teams charged
with implementing a version of bzets.

[fn:1] You can, for example, loop from =0= to infinity and then see if
       this number exists in =T= --- but this is probably the worst way
       to solve the problem, at least from a computational perspective.
       E.g., if it takes $O(n)$ to search through =T= to see if some
       integer =i= exists in it, then this algorithm has $O(n^2)$
       complexity because you need to run the search for every single
       integer in =T=.

[fn:2] A closely related operation is
       [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two's_complement][two's
       complement]] arithmetic. You can read about it from the
       [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Find_first_set]["Find first set"]]
       article on Wikipedia.

[fn:3] No, I did not get the job. But I did get a free lesson in
       interviewing over Skype. And I also had a very pleasant
       conversation about sparse bitsets, and this alone made the whole
       thing worthwhile.
